[1. Set Up](SetUp.md) | [2. Folder Structure](lab-001.md) | [3. Apache Role](lab-002.md) | [4. Mysql Role](lab-002.md) | [5. Using Facts](lab-004.md) | [6. Using Vault](lab-005.md)

# LAB5 ~ Using Vault

##Parametising users and passwords.
Currently we have a working set of roles and playbooks to configure both of our applications servers as well as deploy and configure our application. However this setup still requires us to hard code sensitive data into our code.

To fix this in this lab we will use Vault to encrypt some of our data files.

First we need to move our data out lets go back to the mysql role and create to variables in the defaults file.

```yml
mysqluser: "demo"

mysqlpass: "demo"
```

Add these variables to our exsisting mysqldb plays.

```yml
- name: create demo user
  mysql_user:
    name: {{ mysqluser }}
    password: {{ mysqlpass }}
    priv: demo.*:ALL
    host: '%'
    state: present
```
##Encrypting and viewing the data.
Now we can encrypt the file with our sensitive data. Return to the defaults folder and run the command `ansible-vault encrypt main.yml`

You will be prompted with a password, input one confirm it and dont forget it.

When you try to view the file you should see encrypted text. Try running the command `cat main.yml`

If you want to view the encrypted file properly type the command `ansible-vault view main.yml`

##Running our playbook with Vault

Now that the file is encrypted we need to tell ansible to decrypt this data when calling the playbook. To do this we can run `ansible-playbook InstallPythonApp.yml --ask-vault-pass`

