[Set Up](doc/SetUp.md) | [Folder Structure](doc/lab-001.md) | [Mysql Role](doc/lab-002.md) | [Apache Role](doc/lab-003.md) | [Using Facts](doc/lab-004.md) | [Ansible Vault](doc/lab-005.md)

# LAB4 ~ Using Facts

At this point we have two working roles to configure both the mysql server and the apache server. As well as deploy our files onto the appropriate machines. In this lab the objective is to create a playbook that will run both these roles and introduce the use of facts to complete the final bits of configuration for our app.

## Creating the final playbook

Go back to the top level directory where we created our InstallPythonApp.yml file and open it in an editor.

This file will declare what we run and the order we run them. Lets first add both our newly created roles at the top

```yml
---
- hosts: control
  become: true
  roles:
    - conner.apache

- hosts: database
  become: true
  roles:
    - conner.mysql
```

Here we delcare what set of hosts we want to run against. We declare `become: true` to give the play elevated running rights and finally declare what role we want to run against.

We set up each role according to each host.

##Setting the connection string.

Ansible when running picks up local 'facts' about its current hosts which can be used to populate plays with information of the current running machine. If we run something like `ansible control -m setup` we can examine all the facts currently for our hosts under control. Say if we wanted to filter these we could run something siilar to `ansible all -m setup -a 'filter=ansible_eth[0-2]'` to grab facts only relatable to interfaces 0-2.

If we want to test these facts and pull certain subsets of data for our playbooks we can use the debug feature of ansible. Write the following

```yml
- hosts: control
  become: true
  tasks:
  - name: print db ip
    debug:
      msg: "{{ hostvars[groups['database'][0]]['ansible_eth1']['ipv4']['address'] }}"
```

Here we look in hostvars(our collection of facts) filter it to the nodes in the database group and set that we want it running against our first db server, In this case our only only one. We check for the 'ansible_eth1' group to look at the eth1 interface of our db server and grab the ipv4 ip.

We can use this to set up the final configuration for the app. The connection string to the DB.

##Configuring our connection string

Now that we have tested our facts we can use it to populate a play. Lets use lineinfile to find and replace our old connection string and add a new one.

```yml
  - name: fix connection string
    lineinfile:
      dest: /var/www/demo/demo.wsgi
      regexp: ^os.environ
      line: "os.environ['DATABASE_URI'] = 'mysql://demo:demo@{{ hostvars[groups['database'][0]]['ansible_eth1']['ipv4']['address'] }}/demo'"
    notify:
    - touch wsgi
    - restart apache  
```
Here we look for the os.environ line and then and replace it with the fact we checked above.

##Adding the handlers

We have to notifys on the bottom of the above play. Lets add the final handlers for them so when we change the connection string we touch the wsgi so it picks up the change and restart apache for good measure.

We are running this outside of our roles so we can define the handlers in this playbook.

```yml
  handlers:
    - name: restart apache
      service:
        name: apache2
        state: restarted
    
    - name: touch wsgi
      file:
        path: /var/www/demo/demo.wsgi
        state: touch
```

Finally lets run the playbook. Type the command and `ansible-playbook InstallPythonApp.yml` and watch the output.

## Playbook
```yml
---
- hosts: control
  become: true
  roles:
    - conner.apache

- hosts: database
  become: true
  roles:
    - conner.mysql

- hosts: control
  become: true
  tasks:
  - name: print db ip
    debug:
      msg: "{{ hostvars[groups['database'][0]]['ansible_eth1']['ipv4']['address'] }}"

  - name: fix connection string
    lineinfile:
      dest: /var/www/demo/demo.wsgi
      regexp: ^os.environ
      line: "os.environ['DATABASE_URI'] = 'mysql://demo:demo@{{ hostvars[groups['database'][0]]['ansible_eth1']['ipv4']['address'] }}/demo'"
    notify:
    - touch wsgi
    - restart apache  

  handlers:
    - name: restart apache
      service:
        name: apache2
        state: restarted
    
    - name: touch wsgi
      file:
        path: /var/www/demo/demo.wsgi
        state: touch
```