[1. Set Up](SetUp.md) | [2. Folder Structure](lab-001.md) | [3. Apache Role](lab-002.md) | [4. Mysql Role](lab-002.md) | [5. Using Facts](lab-004.md) | [6. Using Vault](lab-005.md)


# LAB2 ~ Configuring our ansible directory

Now that our environment is configured we need to set up a structure to start
creating our playbooks and roles.

Note that when we are creating playbooks and roles we will always be doing it
in the __/ansible__ directory on the control machine. For this lab we will be
working here.

### Creating role templates

The first is to create a folder for our roles. `mkdir roles`

Swap to our new roles directory and lets start creating a templated structure
for our own roles. Run the following commannd `ansible-galaxy init
[yourname].apache`

This will create the following folder structure:

1. files - Files to be added to the machine that dont require further modification
2. meta - Here we can declare meta data for our role. This includes data such as author, platforms and dependencies
3. templates - Files to be added to the machine that require modictation (Configuration files that rely on ansible facts)
4. vars - variables in vars have a higher priority then defaults (useful for versioning)
5. defaults - This folder will store all the variables we will need to use in the role
6. handlers - targets for the notify statement. These almost always tend to be services.
7. tasks - Here is where the ansible plays will be stored. This is where will be doing most of our work.
8. tests - This folder is used to house the tests for our role.

While we are here lets also make one for our mysql role. Run the following command `ansible-galaxy init [yourname.mysql]`

### Adding the playbook
Finally at the __/ansible__ directory create an empty playbook so we can all our hosts. Run the command `touch InstallPythonApp.yml`

### Structure
If this is done correctly you should have the following directory structure in your control machine.
```
├── ansible.cfg  
├── hosts  
├── InstallPythonApp.yml  
└── roles  
    ├── conner.apache  
    │ ├── defaults  
    │   │   └── main.yml  
    │   ├── handlers  
    │   │   └── main.yml  
    │   ├── meta  
    │   │   └── main.yml  
    │   ├── README.md  
    │   ├── tasks  
    │   │   └── main.yml  
    │   ├── tests  
    │   │   ├── inventory  
    │   │   └── test.yml  
    │   └── vars  
    │       └── main.yml  
    └── conner.mysql  
        ├── defaults  
        │   └── main.yml  
        ├── handlers  
        │   └── main.yml  
        ├── meta  
        │   └── main.yml  
        ├── README.md  
        ├── tasks  
        │   └── main.yml  
        ├── tests  
        │   ├── inventory  
        │   └── test.yml  
        └── vars  
            └── main.yml  
```
If you are interested in the best practices for Directory Layout check out the following:

### Further reading
[Directory Best Practices](http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/playbooks_best_practices.html#directory-layout)