[Set Up](doc/SetUp.md) | [Folder Structure](doc/lab-001.md) | [Mysql Role](doc/lab-002.md) | [Apache Role](doc/lab-003.md) | [Ansible Vault](doc/lab-004.md)

LAB2 ~ Creating our mysql role

Now we have a working ansible directory and install we can start writing up what we want from Ansible. In this lab we will aim to make use of a number of Ansible Modules to install and configure a mysql server for us.

Change directory into your name.mysql/tasks folder and open up the main.yml file. You will be presented with something similar to this.

---
# tasks file for conner.test

This is an empty playbook to which we can start writing plays to. Everything in Ansible is written in Ansible asides from templates is written in YML the "---" indicates the start of our yml file. 

For the first play we should look to install mysqlserver itself. To do this we will be using the "apt" module


Insert the following four lines into your main.yml file.

- name: install mysql-server
  apt:
    name: mysql-server
    state: present
    update_cache: yes

http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/apt_module.html

What we have above is a play. Lets look at exactly what each lines does. The top line we give our play a name. This logically doesnt affect the play at all but will be reported to our prompt so give it a short and precise name so we can see what the play is actually doing.

After this we declare what module we are actually using and state the options we want it to have. We give it the name of the package we want to install. The current state, and finally an update on the cache.

Lets add the next play. 

- name: install tools
  apt:
    name: "{{ item }}"
    state: present
    update_cache: yes
  with_items:
    - "{{ mysqlreq }}"

Similar to before but here we introduce variables. Variables in Ansible are defined by the {{ }} syntax. with_items indicates we are looping through a list.

Change directory into the defaults folder and add the following.

mysqlreq:
    - python-mysqldb

Here we define a list of what we installed. On execution ansible will gather this variable and populate the play with its data.

For the third play add the following

- name: ensure mysql started
  service:
    name: mysql
    state: started
    enabled: yes

http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/service_module.html

This is another ansible module known as serivce. It can be used to manage services or simple check on there status. Here we check for the mysql service and ensure that is is started. Enabled ensures we start the service on boot.

For the fourth play we are going to configure mysql to ensure that its listening on all ports. To do this we need to change a line in the my.cnf file.

- name: ensure mysql listening on all ports
  lineinfile:
    dest: /etc/mysql/my.cnf
    regexp: ^bind-address
    line: "bind-address = 0.0.0.0"
  notify: restart mysql

  http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/lineinfile_module.html

  Here we pass a few options. dest instructs the play exactly what folder we would like to edit. regexp is regex used to look for our exact line and line is the replacement text we need.

  The notify statement instructs a call to a handler. Lets define this handler before we move on to the next place. Move to the roles handler directory and add the following.

  ---
- name: restart mysql
  service: name=mysql state=restarted

  This tells the handler what service we want to change and what state we would like it in.

  Because of this notify whenever the lineinfile play runs it will restart mysql allowing the db to pick up its new configuration.

  Swap back to the task folder and open your main file again.

  Now we have mysql configured we need to create a database as well as a user for our application.

  Add the following play.

  - name: create demo database
  mysql_db:
    name: demo
    state: present

 http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/mysql_db_module.html

 Here we use the mysql_db module. We pass the name of the database we want to use as well as what state we require. Present will ensure the demo database is on the server if its not been created previously.

 Finally for the user add the following play.

 - name: create demo user
  mysql_user:
    name: demo
    password: demo
    priv: demo.*:ALL
    host: '%'
    state: present

http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/mysql_user_module.html

Here our options represent how we want our user configured. Name and password are self explanatory. priv is how we set up the users rights. Here we give it acess to everything in the demo db. Host constructs the host part of our mysql user name. By providing % we allow all ips.

Now we have a role that can bring up a basic mysql db and user from scratch!