[1. Set Up](SetUp.md) | [2. Folder Structure](lab-001.md) | [3. Apache Role](lab-002.md) | [4. Mysql Role](lab-003.md) | [5. Using Facts](lab-004.md) | [6. Using Vault](lab-005.md)


# LAB4 ~ Creating our mysql role

## Installing Pacakges

Insert the following four lines into your main.yml file.

```yml
- name: install tools
  apt:
    name: "{{ item }}"
    state: present
    update_cache: yes
  with_items:
    - "{{ mysqlreq }}"
```
[apt module doc](http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/apt_module.html)

Lets look at exactly what each lines does. The top line we give our play a name. This logically doesnt affect the play at all but will be reported to our prompt so give it a short and precise name so we can see what the play is actually doing.

After this we declare what module we are actually using and state the options we want it to have. We give it the name of the package we want to install. The current state, and finally an update on the cache.

Similar to before but here we introduce variables. Variables in Ansible are defined by the `{{ var }}` syntax. `with_items` indicates we are looping through a list. Lets populate the list.

Change directory into the `defaults` folder and add the following.

```yml
mysqlreq:
    - python-mysqldb
    - mysql-server
```
Here we define a list of what we installed. On execution ansible will gather this variable and populate the play with its data.

## Handling Services

For the third play add the following

```yml
- name: ensure mysql started
  service:
    name: mysql
    state: started
    enabled: yes
```
[service module doc](http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/service_module.html)

This is another ansible module known as serivce. It can be used to manage services or simple check on there status. Here we check for the mysql service and ensure that is is started. Enabled ensures we start the service on boot.

## Editing files
For the fourth play we are going to configure mysql to ensure that its listening on all ports. To do this we need to change a line in the my.cnf file.

```yml
- name: ensure mysql listening on all ports
  lineinfile:
    dest: /etc/mysql/my.cnf
    regexp: ^bind-address
    line: "bind-address = 0.0.0.0"
  notify: restart mysql
```
  [lineinfile module doc](http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/lineinfile_module.html)

  Here we pass a few options. dest instructs the play exactly what folder we would like to edit. regexp is regex used to look for our exact line and line is the replacement text we need.

## Creating Handlers
  The notify statement instructs a call to a handler. Lets define this handler before we move on to the next place. Move to the roles handler directory and add the following.
  
```yml
  ---
- name: restart mysql
  service: name=mysql state=restarted
```
  This tells the handler what service we want to change and what state we would like it in. Because of this notify whenever the lineinfile play runs it will restart mysql allowing the db to pick up its new configuration.

  Swap back to the task folder and open your main file again.

## Adding Databases and Users
  Now we have mysql configured we need to create a database as well as a user for our application.

  Add the following play.
```yml
  - name: create demo database
  mysql_db:
    name: demo
    state: present
```
 [mysql_db module doc](http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/mysql_db_module.html)

 Here we use the mysql_db module. We pass the name of the database we want to use as well as what state we require. Present will ensure the demo database is on the server if its not been created previously.

 Finally for the user add the following play.

```yml
 - name: create demo user
  mysql_user:
    name: demo
    password: demo
    priv: demo.*:ALL
    host: '%'
    state: present
```
[mysql_user module doc](http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/mysql_user_module.html)

Here our options represent how we want our user configured. Name and password are self explanatory. priv is how we set up the users rights. Here we give it acess to everything in the demo db. Host constructs the host part of our mysql user name. By providing % we allow all ips.

Now we have a role that can bring up a basic mysql db and user from scratch!

## Playbook
```yml
---
- name: install tools
  apt:
    name: "{{ item }}"
    state: present
    update_cache: yes
  with_items:
    - "{{ mysqlreq }}"

- name: ensure mysql started
  service:
    name: mysql
    state: started
    enabled: yes

- name: ensure mysql listening on all ports
  lineinfile:
    dest: /etc/mysql/my.cnf
    regexp: ^bind-address
    line: "bind-address = 0.0.0.0"
  notify: restart mysql

- name: create demo database
  mysql_db:
    name: demo
    state: present

- name: create demo user
  mysql_user:
    name: demo
    password: demo
    priv: demo.*:ALL
    host: '%'
    state: present
```